# 3. Keep you child safe at home, school and in community

* While you can trust most three- or four-year-olds to stay on the sidewalk with you, a child with major language delays won’t understand the concepts of street, curb, stop sign—or why they shouldn’t go into traffic. Many of our kids with delays simply don’t have the ability to understand danger or assess if a situation is safe. And this will remain true into adulthood for some with moderate-to-severe autism.
* Put covers on electrical outlets.
* Have a fire safety plan.
* Here are some questions to ask as you review the areas where your child may be throughout the day
* Bolts and locks are just as important in schools and other facilities as they are at home. But schools have different regulations to follow so gates and bolts are oftentimes prohibited.
* If it isn’t possible to use a gate or the classroom door, can a staff member always be positioned between the door and your child? Are windows left open, or are they easy to open without a staff person’s knowledge? Are there items in the room that could be hazardous to your child if he gets hold of them before an adult realizes it? Are bathrooms safe, and will your child be supervised when there? Will your child be on a playground, and is that area fenced in? Are there hazards within the playground, and how will your child be supervised while there? If your child rides a school bus, will he be supervised on the bus and when transitioning from the bus to the school building? If any of these are issues that might affect your child, you need to make sure there’s enough support in place to prevent danger. I know this can feel daunting, but these are important safety problems to solve.
* Drowning is the number one cause of death of children with autism. For some reason, they seem to be attracted to water
* if your child has only experienced the water with floaties, teach him how to swim without floaties as early as possible.
* Sometimes, it takes trial and error to discover what command your child will respond to. One of my clients has a son who wouldn’t respond to “stop,” but he did come to her when she said, “Give me your hand.
* Experts say typically developing kids shouldn’t be allowed to cross the street alone until they’re 10 years old.
* Also, as soon as possible, once your child is talking, you can and should teach your child his name, address, and telephone number in case he gets lost. This information should be available on a medical alert bracelet or GPS tracker, too.
